Was there any sort of exchange or let's say group
criticism of papers in those early years at Woods
Hole?
No, about the only criticism was that There was
the, we were free to publish without any
supervision, but there was a thing called Woods
Hole Contribution Number. In order to get a Woods
Hole Contribution Number, you had to hand it to the
director and he would read it and say, okay, we have
a Woods Hole Contribution Number. So there was a
great, there was that kind of indirect gimmick for
getting the papers supervised a little bit. But
No, right at the very beginning there was no, there
was no
really helpful review process. The Woods Hole
published a series called Papers in Physical
Oceanology and Meteorology, Those were largely
reviewed for good English and so forth by the
editor of that. He was also the business manager
and also an archaeologist who spent most of his
time at Harvard. He only had one business manager.
He was part town.
He had a secretary in later years who did all the
purchasing and personnel and everything else. I
guess the The first thing I ever wrote was not a
scientific paper. The first thing I ever wrote was
a book, a popular book about oceanography. It was
before I came to the Oceanographic Institution.
It was probably a brilliant politic thing to do.
You know, you don't sort of write a book about
medicine and then go to medical school. But I went,
I had, without some trouble, I wrote a book, a
popular book on oceanography called Science of
the Seven Seas. It was published by Cornell
Maritime Press in 1945, and I wrote a book about it.
I came to Woods Hole and was kind of embarrassed by
it, why I didn't like it very much. And so I thought
maybe I ought to go to Scripps and get some kind of an
education
in oceanography. I swear to have seen the book,
unfortunately. And so he wouldn't let me come in on
account of the book, and basically he was kind of
disgusting to me. told that to say it wasn't all
that bad at all. But I don't have a copy anymore and I
think there's a few, I know a few people have one.
Warren Wister has one, George Deacon has one. It's
a great challenge. But I don't
know. I guess it only took me about three weekends
to write And, of course, spread it and worked very
hard on his book, which came out the same
time. It sold quite well. I think it made about
$5,000 out of it. At that time, my first salary was
always $1,300. So $5,000 was quite a lot of money to
make. I don't know any copies around it. I'd
systematically destroy them if I could find them.
What prompted the writing of that book? Well,
that's the interest of the field when I was doing
that. That got me interested. That's
the interest of the field. I looked around the
libraries and found various things. Copycom
stepped out and
rewrote it. And then began the scientific papers.
Yeah, that was the first thing I wrote. That took me
about two years to get started.
What about people outside of Woods Hole? What kind
of contact did you have with them?
That's interesting.
Very little. I had, I know that, that Islin asked
VanArts and me to teach his course in Harvard once
or twice, which we did in 1948-49. And I had a, and I
taught for one or two years,
by going once a week to Yale in a, in a in a general
science course that was held in front of the
geological departments. I think that might have
been something like 1951, something
of that sort, around that period. But at those
times we had almost no contacts outside. And then
we, about 1955, The meteorological project that
the Neumann had at Princeton broke up. And Johnny
and Phillips came from there to MIT. And right
away, we began to have a going relation with the
people there at MIT. And so every two weeks, we'd
have a meeting. and give some informal papers
about what we were working on. They were quite
informal at that time. And we'd have, it was
Fridays, we'd have the meetings every two weeks,
either at MIT or down here at Woods Hole, starting
around 1955, I guess. And that was very good. It got
people like C.C. Lynn and Lou Howard and others
interested in the, involved.
And the,
that's become more institutionalized as time has
gone on and somewhat more formal. People are sort
of scared to talk at night because there's so many
high-powered people sitting around trying to
shoot you down. Don't you think people are a little
bit scared? Yeah, I think so. But it didn't used to
be that way.
So that was a very important thing to us
intellectually, was that contact with the
meteorology and mathematics department at MIT.
Well, that's a fair number at the mathematics
department. For example, one might not think so,
but if you look at the publications that have come
out of the math department, there's a very
well-known book on rotating fluids that Harvey
Greenspan wrote, for example. Well, that would
never have come if he hadn't had the contact with
rotating fluid mechanical people that he had
through these weekend seminars, these
end-of-the-week seminars.
The one way that we managed to keep other people
interested was that those things had never been
restricted to oceanography. been a little bit
broader, so meteorologists or astrophysicists
or something go dark out there as well, as long as
there was some kind of large-scale fluid dynamics
problem.
I thought you were going to say the way you kept them
interesting is you served beer. Well, yeah. Well,
actually, we didn't serve beer. We served better
things than that afterwards, but they had, but
then we'd go to a restaurant or something. Yeah,
that was one of the problems. We always managed to
find some money at Woods Hole so we could have
martinis or something, but at MIT they never seem
to be able to have a slush fund, so it was a great
source of embarrassment for people at MIT.
Harvard was rather good that way. They could
always come up with something. But in the early
days it wasn't Harvard, it was MIT and Woods Hole.
the first four or five years. How often
did these meet, once a month? Twice a month. Twice a
month, okay. Just about once a month. Quite
exciting. Winter times, snow storms, it's quite
exciting. They weren't so very big, you know,
perhaps two cars might
drive up from here. Four to eight people or
something would go up each time and go down. Sort of
groups, I guess. I think it was might
have been 15 or 18 people. As you leave Woods Hole
and moved first to Harvard, then MIT, did it seem to
you as if the number of contacts that you were
making narrowed, that you don't seem to have as
much outside input as you thought you
did?
Well, I think, I think I really probably, that's a
little bit interesting, I think I've never made a
very, at any time did I make a very serious effort to
broaden my contacts at either Harvard or MIT.
I think I've had a tendency to
maintain contacts at Woods Hole as strongly as I
could.
By the way, I've kind of been a little bit of an
outsider at Woods Hole for 17 years now, but
I guess I'm the only guy that's worked here for 17
years, the past 17 years without ever getting any
salary from the place. But But
by being here a good fraction of the time, it means
that I don't have the, I can go into MIT faculty, but
I would not know most
people. I wouldn't be sure if I went to some kind of a
party event.
What was your reaction as a scientist in the 1960s
involved in oceanography when you began to
receive pressure from your students to eliminate
your work with defense research? Well, I was
always sort of double-minded about defense
research. I accepted the necessity for doing a
certain amount of it. I didn't
really want to work it. defense research at all. I
registered as a conscientious objector, and so I
had probably didn't do any secret research after I
gave the infrared thing over to Bill Richeson in
1951.
I guess the reason why I came to Mattel to work on
submarine, anti-submarine warfare was that
somehow, somehow of all the things that, of all the
circumstances under which you might really be
willing to kill people would be if you were under
attack. And the submarine seemed to me to be about
as most clearly an attack weapon as many things
could be. Dropping a hash cannon on a submarine was
somehow different from dropping a bomb on
Hamburg, for instance. And I felt that kind of, I
felt that, you know, trying to find a way. of some
kind of compromise, and it seemed to me that that
was my own personal compromise that I was willing
to make. So I really never kind of really
I was rather glad not to do any military research. I
mean, if you take someone like Walter Munk, for
example, who all his life has been connected with
chasing things, meetings, and post-sabotage
missiles, and I don't know what things all his
life. I very early, I very early found it somewhat
distasteful and decided to try to avoid it. But I
also didn't really want to make a big thing of it
because I'm not so absolutely confident that my
own personal view is a one that everybody in the
country can afford to espouse and all these moral
things are kind of valid. And so I never could make a
a very good argument for pacifism, except it was
something which was personally very strong in me.
And so, on
the other hand, when we're all, when there were
student
unrest and riots and so
forth, I didn't really try to associate
myself with those either. We were people who
wanted to become leaders of elements, pacifists
or something like that, so I wasn't doing any... I
didn't feel vulnerable from students, but I
didn't... I was kind of curious, you know. In a way,
I didn't really... I found some of their behavior
kind of distasteful. I went to Yale to get an
honorary degree once and the ROTC students were
there getting their commissions and the rest of
the students there were just cheering and booing
me. And,
you know,
I didn't like that. You know, I'd see these poor
kids forgetting their commissions. I couldn't,
I'm not that kind of a pacifist. I wanted to enjoy or
encourage or anything like that. I was sitting
next to Art Buchwald, and he said, he was
constantly
against the board, and sort of went down on me, but
these kids were made board, he says, and these two
guys, and this is awful, he said, they're the,
they're the, those ROTC students are the, are the,
are the, are the greatest people here. I guess one,
I guess, really, basically, no matter what
everybody wants to do, I always want to do
something different. And if I happen to be in a, if I
happen to be in a pacifist country,
I'd probably be in a knowledgeable stance about
that. I have a feeling that's probably true. It's a
question of, you know, trying to, trying to You're
trying to suspend judgment. You're trying not to
be carried along with the crowd in some blind way.
And so you've got an overdose of antibodies, no
matter
what everybody else is doing. You resist it. So I
mean, if I were in a conservative country, I'd be a
liberal. If I was in a liberal country, I'd be a
conservative. I just know rebellious. In some
way, I wouldn't want to. I'd try to see the other
side and maybe over-emphasize it. But I wouldn't
find it very strong. It would just be my own
personal feelings about it. This is an obligatory
question which you can choose not to answer. Of all
the work you've done, what do you consider your
major accomplishment?
I don't know.
I guess I would want to make it the thing that I
thought was the most fun,
the biggest
surprise. I think... I think the thing I like the
best, you know, it's kind of crazy, I kind of like
the salt fountain the rest of everything. It's one
of the least significant things I suppose there
is. I kind of like the salt fountain the best,
although it seems to have almost no significance
in the ocean at all. I've tried rather hard
to make it happen, but I kind of like it because it's
just kind of so crazy. I think as far as most
significant things are concerned, I suppose
the attempts to attempt to put together some kind
of a wind-driven model of the ocean, an attempt to
build some kind of theory of thermocline, thermal
circulation of the ocean. I guess from the
objective point of view, those are the most I think
most things, more has grown out of those
than other things. Nothing
much has grown out of the salt, not directly as far
as the ocean is concerned. Comments to
prospective students. What do you suppose will
be, let's say for lack of a better word, the new hot
field in oceanography? For a while, nuclear
physicists were sort of the in-group to be. What do
you think occurs next? In oceanography? In
oceanography. Oh, yeah. Well, right now, a hot
field right now is all the large-scale terminals
and eddies.
That seems to be a hot field. But I suppose that my
feeling about a hot field is that Maybe I'm wrong.
Well, there are certain obvious fields that
people are going to go into, things which are very
clearly going to happen, like an intensification
study of equatorial phenomena, for example. But
those are, it's hard to, you're not really
predicting very much when you say those things,
because those things are already beginning to
happen.
I suppose that
there'll be a transformation of
descriptive water mass chemical kind of
oceanography
into a quantitative science once the proper
language
and
computing technique and so forth is constructed
in the middle hand. If you look at this, there's a
tremendous amount of oceanographic literature
which is fairly descriptive on the basis of what
muscles and capsules are. And the ability to
marshal all that information in some kind of a of a
systematic, balanced way so that it can, so that
computations can be made easily and there's a
range of validity. There's a susceptibility to
errors and so forth that can be laid out very
clearly. I suppose that
that's going to be a
something's
going
to happen. I can't believe that it's going to
be in this chaotic qualitative state. And somehow
some very tidy-minded, clever people are going to
be able to put the whole thing together in good
ways. But the standard This really doesn't mean
field work or anything. This means just sort of a
re-combination of certain descriptive elements
that already exist. I thought that for some time. I
don't seem to have the talents or the skills to
carry it off. I think Carol Walsh is coming close to
it. Not I don't know.
It's a very big fight tonight. One feels that there
are hundreds and hundreds of qualitative
indications of what's going on in the ocean buried
in the descriptive literature,
never properly
put together. I mean, it's just as though, it's
just as though you were,
it's just as though you had some kind of a very very
badly, if you had, suppose you had a few of a
crossword puzzle, of a jigsaw puzzle, but through
some very bad diffusing eyeglasses, so you really
couldn't see the fact that the pieces had
interlocking sides, and all you could see was
patterns of color and so forth. And as you looked at
it, you might try to take all the predominantly
blue ones here, and all the red ones, and the green
ones, and move them around, something like that.
See, what does this all mean? But then, as soon as
your eyes can see the fact that there are edges
which can fit together, suddenly there's a new set
of rules to the game. And you put together this
thing using hints from the covers. but not using
the color in some other kind of way. And then all of a
sudden, you can start to put the thing together.
And I think that we have all these hints, but we
don't have
the proper quantitative language
or something to put the things together. And at
some stage, that may happen. It could be exciting.
And all these qualitative
things are very important. For example,
Worthington just came in yesterday or the day
before. I also put a print on my desk here, which is a
paper that he just published, which is a big
refutation of my business simulation model. Now,
you know, he's had it around for several years and
didn't show it to me until he got it published on
some desk. Well, it's a very, it's a very
interesting, it's a very interesting paper. He
says that the, that the Antarctic circuit, the
Antarctic bottom water isn't being formed
anymore. It hasn't been formed. It's basically
not being formed at all. Now, most of us, myself and
many other people, have always figured that the
whole deep Pacific and Indian, Pacific and Indian
oceans were filled up with a mixture
predominantly of Antarctic bottom water. It was
going on. So it was an overturn of something like
once every thousand years. It's a little bit of a
disaster on the basis of some some description of
the cellocase, that there isn't any
. Well, one
can conjure up arguments
to try to demolish his thesis. One can point out
that he ignores features of numerical models that
have already been made. In fact, he's taken a very
simple model of a steady-state geostrophic
infection. He's ignoring lateral mixing and all
kinds of things like that. Well, the way I feel
about this is that probably he's, by looking
around in the clever way he does at the
information, He's recognized some color to a few
pieces of the puzzle that other people haven't
seen. But that he's overlooking certain things
like the shapes of the jigsaw puzzle itself. And so
we haven't seen those, we haven't seen the colors
of those things, which we do need as hints. But at
the same time,
he's probably isolated some major constraint on
the system, which is not quite as strong a
constraint as he thinks it is. And because we don't
have ways of putting together in a systematic way
other constraints like that over the whole ocean,
we can't really There's not so much to contend
about, basically.
And someday, these important facts aren't going
to be introduced one at a time, like
dissociated from everything else that's ever
been introduced. All of these things, all of these
ideas will come in in some balanced way to give an
optimum picture of what the circulation is. I
don't know exactly how
it's going to be done. But I do know how to take his
paper and to relate it to some numerical models of
the abyssal circulation, which make his case for
zero energetic bottom-up formation very much
weaker. I don't want to abandon the important
things that he discovers, but I think that the
conceptual framework in which the argument is
made is too narrow, too special, and therefore
those important facts don't quite mean what he
thinks they mean. And they ought to be related to a
lot of other important facts all around the place,
not just selective, like a lawyer makes a case for
some particular thing, but use all the good
evidence
in some kind of way and see what it tells you. And as
long as we don't have some kind of way of
manipulating it, weighing, relating large
amounts of different kinds of qualitative
evidence, then the temptation to be a lawyer, just
pick and choose those aspects of the thing which
will defend a particular case, that temptation is
always going to be there. And so we don't want to be a
bunch of lawyers arguing special cases. We want
some mechanism for a measured judgment. which we
can all agree what its elements are. I think some
numerical methods are going to be worked out. I
think that's going to be an exciting thing.